Chapter 9
Discrete process measurement
The word “discrete” means individual or distinct. In engineering, a “discrete” variable or
measurement refers to a true-or-false condition. Thus, a discrete sensor is one that i s only able
to indicate whether the measured variable is above or below a speciﬁed setpoint.
Discrete sensors typically take the form of switches, built to “trip” when the measured quantity
either exceeds or falls below a speciﬁed value. These devices are less sophisticated than so -called
continuous sensors capable of reporting an analog value, but they are quite useful in industry.
Many diﬀerent types of discrete sensors exist, detecting variables such as posit ion, ﬂuid pressure,
material level, temperature, and ﬂuid ﬂow rate. The output of a discrete sensor is typi cally electrical
in nature, whether it be an active voltage signal or just resistive continui ty between two terminals
on the device.
655656 CHAPTER 9. DISCRETE PROCESS MEASUREMENT
9.1 “Normal” status of a switch
Perhaps the most confusing aspect of discrete sensors is the deﬁnition of a sensor’s normal status.
Electrical switch contacts are typically classiﬁed as either normally-open or normally-closed, referring
to the open or closed status of the contacts under “normal” conditions. But what exact ly deﬁnes
“normal” for a switch? The answer is not complex, but is often misunderstood due to the ambiguous
nature of the word normal.
The “normal” status for a switch is the status its electrical contacts are in during a condition
of no physical stimulation . Another way to think of the “normal” status is to think in terms of
the switch being at rest . For a momentary-contact pushbutton switch, this would be the status of
the switch contact when it is not being pressed. Electrical switches are always drawn in schematic
diagrams in their “normal” statuses, regardless of their application. For ins tance, the following
diagram shows a normally-open pushbutton switch controlling a lamp on a 1 20 volt AC circuit (the
“hot” and “neutral” poles of the AC power source labeled L1 and L2, respectively) :
L1 L2
Switch Lamp
Normally-open contacts
We can tell this switch is a normally-open (NO) switch because it is drawn i n an open position.
The lamp will energize only if someone presses the switch, holding its normally-o pen contacts in the
“closed” position. Normally-open switch contacts are sometimes referred to in the electrical industry
as form-A contacts.
If we had used a normally-closed pushbutton switch instead, the behavior would be exactly
opposite. The lamp would energize if the switch was left alone, but it would turn oﬀ if anyone
pressed the switch. Normally-closed switch contacts are sometimes referred to in the electrical
industry as form-B contacts:
L1 L2
Switch Lamp
Normally-closed contacts
This seems rather simple, don’t you think? What could possibly be confusing about the “normal”
status of a switch? The confusion becomes evident, though, when you begin to consider process
switches (i.e. switches actuated by process measurements such as pressure, ﬂow, level , etc.). In
order to better understand this concept, we will consider a simple application of a ﬂow switch: a
switch built to actuate when a suﬃcient rate of ﬂuid ﬂows through a pipe.9.1. “NORMAL” STATUS OF A SWITCH 657
A ﬂow switch is built to detect ﬂuid ﬂow through a pipe. In a schematic diagram, the s witch
symbol appears to be a toggle switch with a “ﬂag” hanging below. The schem atic diagram, of course,
only shows the circuitry and not the pipe where the switch is physically mounted:
L1 L2
Flow switch
Alarm
lamp
A low coolant flow alarm circuit
This particular ﬂow switch is used to trigger an alarm light if coolant ﬂo w through the pipe ever
falls to a dangerously low level, and the contacts are normally-closed as evidenced by the closed
status in the diagram. Here is where things get confusing: even though this switch is designated as
“normally-closed,” it will spend most of its lifetime being held in the open s tatus by the presence of
adequate coolant ﬂow through the pipe. Only when the ﬂow through the pipe slows down enoug h
will this switch return to its “normal” status and conduct electrical power to t he lamp. In other
words, the “normal” status for this switch (closed) is actually an abnormal status for the process it
operates within (low ﬂow), for the simple reason that the switch should be stimulated and not at
rest while the process is operating as it should.
Students often wonder why process switch contacts are labeled according to this conv ention of
“no stimulation” instead of according to the typical status of the process in whic h the switch is used.
The answer to this question is that the manufacturer of the switch has no idea whats oever as to your
intended use. A ﬂow switch manufacturer does not know or care whether their product gets used
as a low-ﬂow detector or as a high-ﬂow detector. In other words, the manufacturer cannot predi ct
what the typical status of your process will be, and so the deﬁnition of “normal” status for the
switch must be founded on some common criterion unrelated to your particular appl ication. That
common criterion is the resting status: when the sensor is exposed to the least (or no) amount of
stimulation from the process it senses.
Here is a listing of “normal” deﬁnitions for various process switch types:
• Limit switch : target not contacting the switch
• Proximity switch: target far away
• Pressure switch : low pressure (or even a vacuum)
• Level switch : low level (empty)
• T emperature switch: low temperature (cold)
• Flow switch : low ﬂow rate (ﬂuid stopped)
These are the conditions represented by the switch statuses shown in a schematic di agram.
These may very well not be the statuses of the switches when they are exposed to typical operating
conditions in the process.658 CHAPTER 9. DISCRETE PROCESS MEASUREMENT
A helpful tip to remember about process switches and their respective schematic diagr am symbols
is that the symbols are conventionally drawn in such a way that an upward motion of the movable
switch element represents increasing stimulus . Here are some examples of this, showing various
process switch types and NO/NC contact conﬁgurations, comparing their states wit h no stimulus
versus when the stimulus exceeds the each switch’s threshold or “trip” setting. The normal status
of each switch as deﬁned by the manufacturer is labeled in green text:
NO pressure switch NC pressure switch
Closed when pressure increases beyond threshold Open when pressure increases beyond threshold
NO level switch NC level switch
Open when there is zero level (minimum stimulus)
Closed when level increases beyond threshold
Closed when there is zero pressure (minimum stimulus)Open when there is zero pressure (minimum stimulus)
Closed when there is zero level (minimum stimulus)
Open when level increases beyond threshold
NO temperature switch NC temperature switch
Open when temperature is cold (minimum stimulus) Closed when temperature is cold (minimum stimulus)
Closed when temperature increases beyond threshold Open when temperature increases beyond threshold
NO flow switch NC flow switch
Open when there is zero flow (minimum stimulus)
Closed when flow increases beyond threshold
Closed when there is zero flow (minimum stimulus)
Open when flow increases beyond threshold
It is imperative 1 to remember that the way a switch is drawn in a schematic diagram merely
represents its “normal” status as deﬁned by the manufacturer. This may or may not b e the switch’s
status during “typical” operation of the process, and it may or may not be the s tatus of that switch
at the time of concern when you are examining the schematic! The “normal” status o f a switch
means just one thing: what that switch will do when subjected to minimum stimulus – t hat is to
say, what it will do when its stimulus is less than the actuation threshold of t he switch.
1Mistaken interpretations of switch status remains one of th e most resilient misconceptions for students ﬁrst
learning this topic. It seems that a great many students pref er to think of a switch’s drawn status as its status at
the present moment (e.g. when the process is running as expec ted). I believe the heart of this misconception is the
meaning of the word “normal,” which to most peoples’ minds re fers to “the way things typically are.”9.1. “NORMAL” STATUS OF A SWITCH 659
For example, the LED in this circuit will turn on if the liquid level rises abov e 14 inches and the
pressure falls below 22 PSI and either the ﬂow is less than 3 gallons per minute or the temperature
is greater than 125 degrees Fahrenheit:
+−
14 inches 3 GPM
125 oF
22 PSI
Since we know we need a switch to be closed in order to conduct electricity and provide a path
for current in this circuit, we are looking for the necessary conditions to close ea ch switch. For any
normally-closed (NC) switch, this means a stimulus value less than the actuati on threshold. For any
normally-open (NO) switch, this means a stimulus value great enough to exceed the thr eshold and
“hold” the switch in its actuated state. Since the ﬂow and pressure switches in this circuit are both
NC, we are looking for ﬂow and pressure values less than the respective settings . Since the level
and temperature switches are both NO, we are looking for level and temperatur e values in excess of
their respective settings.
The present status of a switch may be determined by comparing its stimulating q uantity against
its trip (threshold) setting. A switch will be in its “normal” (resting ) state when the stimulus
value is less than the threshold value. Conversely, a switch will be in its “actuated” state when the
stimulus value exceeds the threshold value. Determination of a switch’s status, t herefore, is a matter
of comparing the stimulus quantity to the threshold “trip” setting. One cannot sim ply look at the
schematic diagram to tell what the switch is doing – one must compare the switch’s setting versus
against a known stimulus value in order to tell whether it will be in its resti ng state or not.
Likewise, if we happen to know the switch’s present status in a system, we may qualitatively
determine the stimulating quantity by comparing the present status against the “ normal” (resting)
status. If a switch is in its resting state, then the stimulating quantit y must be less than the trip
threshold. If a switch is in its actuated (non-normal) state, then the stimulat ing quantity must be
greater than the trip threshold 2. The next example showcases these determinations.
2In this discussion I am deliberately omitting the detail of deadband for process switches, for the sake of simplicity.660 CHAPTER 9. DISCRETE PROCESS MEASUREMENT
In this next example, we see a pictorial representation of multiple switches wir ed to the discrete
input channels of a programmable logic controller (PLC), with red LED indicat ors denoting the
real-time status of each input on the PLC:
Power
Run
Fault
Force
L1 L2/N VAC
VDC O/0 VAC
VDC
VAC
VDC
VAC
VDCO/1 O/2 O/3
85-264 VAC
DC OUT
24V DC
COM
I/0 I/1 I/2 I/3 DC
COM
I/4 I/5
Allen-Bradley
MicroLogix PLCComNC NO
Fluid pressure
Trip = 12 PSI
ComNC NO
Temperature
sensing bulb
Trip = 235 oF
ComNC NO
Float
Com NCNO
Trip = 4 inches
Pressure switchTemperature switch
Liquid level
float switch
Limit switch
Pressure switch status
Temperature switch status
Level switch status
Limit switch status
(on) (off)
(on)
(on)
We may determine a switch’s degree of stimulation by comparing its present sta tus with its
“normal” status. If a switch happens to be in the same state as its norma l state (i.e. resting), we
know its stimulus must be less than the threshold (trip) value. If a switch happ ens to be in the
opposite state as its normal state (i.e. actuated), we know its stimulus has exceeded the threshold
(trip) value. The states of these four switches may be shown in a table:
Switch Normal status Present status T rip value Stimulus
Pressure Normally-closed (NC) Closed 12 PSI P < 12 PSI
Temperature Normally-open (NO) Closed 235 oF T > 235 oF
Level Normally-closed (NC) Closed 4 inches L < 4 inches
Limit Normally-open (NO) Open n/a no contact9.2. HAND SWITCHES 661
9.2 Hand switches
A hand switch is exactly what the name implies: an electrical switch actuated by a person’s hand
motion. These may take the form of toggle, pushbutton, rotary, pull-chain, etc. A common form of
industrial pushbutton switch looks something like this:
Button
Threaded neck
Base
NC terminal
NO terminal
NC terminal
NO terminal
The threaded neck inserts through a hole cut into a metal or plastic panel, with a mat ching nut
to hold it in place. Thus, the button faces the human operator(s) while the swit ch contacts reside
on the other side of the panel.
When pressed, the downward motion of the actuator breaks the electrical bridge between the
two NC contacts, forming a new bridge between the NO contacts:
NC terminal
NO terminal
NC terminal
NO terminal
Switch in the actuated
(pressed) state
The schematic diagram symbol for this type of switch looks much like the real thing, with the
normally-closed contact set on top and the normally-open contact set below:662 CHAPTER 9. DISCRETE PROCESS MEASUREMENT
Connecting two of the terminals together makes this form of switch electrically identical to a
Form C :
Connected as a form-C switch
This switch contact arrangement is sometimes referred to as a form-C contact set, since it
incorporates both a form-A contact (normally-open) as well as a form-B cont act (normally-closed).
Most industrial hand switches are available in modular form, where sets of s witch contact blocks
may be “stacked” together to be actuated by the same pushbutton or rotary knob. This allows an
almost unlimited number of switch contacts to be simultaneously actuated by a single actuating
mechanism. Diﬀerent actuator types such as pushbuttons, rotary selectors, knobs , and keyswitches
may also be interchanged with contact modules for maximum ﬂexibility:
Stackable switch
modules9.3. LIMIT SWITCHES 663
9.3 Limit switches
Normally-open
(NO)
Normally-closed
(NC)
Limit switch symbols
A limit switch detects the physical motion of an object by direct contact with that object.
An example of a limit switch is the switch detecting the open position of a n automobile door,
automatically energizing the cabin light when the door opens.
Recall from section 9.1 that the “normal” status of a switch is the resting condition of no
stimulation. A limit switch will be in its “normal” status when it is not in contact with anything
(i.e. nothing touching the switch actuator mechanism).
Limit switches ﬁnd many uses in industry, particular in robotic control and C NC (Computer
Numerical Control) machine tool systems. In many motion-control syst ems, the moving elements
have “home” positions where the computer assigns a position value of zero. For example, the axis
controls on a CNC machine tool such as a lathe or mill all return to their “ home” positions upon
start-up, so the computer can know with conﬁdence the starting locations of each piece. These home
positions are detected by means of limit switches. The computer commands each servo motor to
travel fully in one direction until a limit switch on each axis trips. The position counter for each
axis resets to zero as soon as the respective limit switch detects that the home position has been
reached.
A typical limit switch design uses a roller-tipped lever to make contact with the moving part.
Screw terminals on the switch body provide connection points with the NC and NO co ntacts inside
the switch. Most limit switches of this design share a “common” terminal bet ween the NC and NO
contacts like this:
Com NC NO
Lever
Roller tip
to actuate
Com NC NO
Equivalent schematic
Push lever up
This switch contact arrangement is sometimes referred to as a form-C contact set, since it
incorporates both a form-A contact (normally-open) as well as a form-B cont act (normally-closed).664 CHAPTER 9. DISCRETE PROCESS MEASUREMENT
A close-up view of several limit switches (used on a drum sequencer) shows the arrangemen t of
connection terminals for form-C contacts. Each limit switch has its own “ NO” (normally-open),
“NC” (normally-closed), and “C” (common) screw terminal for wires to attac h:
A limit switch assembly attached to the stem of a rotary valve – used to det ect the fully-closed
and fully-open positions of the valve – is shown in the following photogra ph:
9.4. PROXIMITY SWITCHES 665
9.4 Proximity switches
A proximity switch is one detecting the proximity (closeness) of some object. By deﬁnition, these
switches are non-contact sensors , using magnetic, electric, or optical means to sense the proximity
of objects.
Recall from section 9.1 that the “normal” status of a switch is the resting condition of no
stimulation. A proximity switch will be in its “normal” status when it is distant from any detectable
object.
Being non-contact in nature, proximity switches are often used instead of direct-cont act limit
switches for the same purpose of detecting the position of a machine part, wit h the advantage of
never wearing out over time due to repeated physical contact.
Most proximity switches are active in design. That is, they incorporate a powered electronic
circuit to sense the proximity of an object. Inductive proximity switches sense the presence of
metallic objects through the use of a high-frequency magnetic ﬁeld. Capacitive proximity switches
sense the presence of non-metallic objects through the use of a high-frequency electric ﬁeld. Optical
proximity switches detect the interruption of a light beam by an object. Ultrasonic proximity
switches sense the presence of dense matter by the reﬂection of sound waves.
The schematic diagram symbol for a proximity switch with mechanical con tacts is the same as
for a mechanical limit switch, except the switch symbol is enclosed by a diamond shape, indicating
a powered (active) device:
Normally-open
(NO)
Normally-closed
(NC)
prox prox
Proximity switch symbols
Many proximity switches, though, do not provide “dry contact 3” outputs. Instead, their output
elements are transistors conﬁgured either to source current or sink current. The terms “sourcing”
and “sinking” are best understood by visualizing electric current in the direction o f conventional
ﬂow rather than electron ﬂow .
3This curious label is used to describe switch contacts lacki ng their own built-in power source, as opposed to a
switch contained in a device that also provides power to driv e the switch circuit. Dry contacts may be mechanical
in nature, or they may be electronic (e.g. transistor). By con trast, a “wet” contact is one already connected to an
internal power source, ready to drive a load with no other ext ernal components needed.666 CHAPTER 9. DISCRETE PROCESS MEASUREMENT
The following schematic diagrams contrast the two modes of switch opera tion, using red arrows
to show the direction of current (conventional ﬂow notation). In both examples, the load being
driven by each proximity switch is a light-emitting diode (LED):
Output
+V
Ground
"Sinking" output
proximity switch
Output
+V
Ground
proximity switch
"Sourcing" output
+− 24VDC
+− 24VDC
LED
LED
ground through the switch
Switch "sources" current
Switch is "sinking" or "NPN" type
Switch is "sourcing" or "PNP" type
Brn
Blk
Blu
Brn
Blk
Blu
LED current "sinks" down to
out to the LED
Sensor
circuit
Sensor
circuit
A common coloring convention for electronic proximity switches is brown fo r +V power supply,
blue for ground ( − pole of power supply), and black for the switched output signal. This conventio n
is common to sinking and sourcing proximity switches alike.
An electronic switch designed to sink current through its signal wire is alterna tively referred to
as an NPN switch due to the type of transistor used in its output. Conversely, an electr onic switch
designed to source current through its signal wire may be referred to as a PNP switch. The key to
understanding these labels is to recognize the emitter terminal of the output transisto r is always the
one connected to the power supply rail. For a sinking switch, this means the emitter mus t connect
to the negative rail, necessitating 4 an NPN transistor to do the switching. For a sourcing switch,
4To be honest, one could use an NPN transistor to source current or a PNP to sink, but it would require the9.4. PROXIMITY SWITCHES 667
this means the emitter must connect to the positive rail, in which case only a PNP transistor will
suﬃce.
Yet another convention for describing sourcing and sinking transistor switches is to refer to
them as high-side switches and low-side switches, respectively. A sourcing transistor (PNP) has
its emitter terminal attached directly to the “high” rail (+) of the DC power suppl y. A sinking
transistor (NPN), by contrast, has its emitter terminal attached directl y to the “low” rail ( −) of the
DC power supply.
Output
+V
Ground
Output
+V
Ground
+− 24VDC
+− 24VDC
LED
LED
Sinking transistor = NPN = "low side" switch
Sourcing transistor = PNP = "high side" switch
Brn
Blk
Blu
Brn
Blk
Blu
Sensor
circuit
Sensor
circuit
transistor be used in the common-collector conﬁguration which does not allow for saturation. The engin eers designing
these proximity switches strive for complete saturation of the transistor, in order to achieve minimum “on” resistance ,
and that requires a common-emitter conﬁguration.668 CHAPTER 9. DISCRETE PROCESS MEASUREMENT
These photographs show two diﬀerent styles of electronic proximity switch:
Many industrial proximity switches have built-in LED indicator lamps to help t echnicians
diagnose circuit problems by directly indicating switch status. With just a gla nce, one may tell
whether or not the proximity switch is detecting the presence of an object.9.4. PROXIMITY SWITCHES 669
The next photograph shows a proximity switch detecting the passing of teeth on a cha in sprocket,
generating a slow square-wave electrical signal as the sprocket rotates. Such a s witch may be used
as a rotational speed sensor (sprocket speed proportional to signal frequency) or as a broken chain
sensor (when sensing the rotation of the driven sprocket instead of the drive spro cket):
Like other types of process switches, proximity switches come in both “norm ally open” (NO)
and “normally closed” (NC) varieties. This distinction has nothing whatsoever t o do with sourcing
versus sinking (PNP vs. NPN), but rather what the status of the proximity swi tch will be when
no objects are near. Thus, it is possible to ﬁnd normally-open proximity swi tches that are sinking
(NPN) as well as normally-open proximity switches that are sourcing (PNP ), and normally-closed
proximity switches in either sinking or sourcing designs as well.
These switch characteristics are commonly ﬁxed, and must be speciﬁed when ordering the device.
Likewise, the detection range of a proximity switch is usually a ﬁxed parameter rather than being
adjustable.670 CHAPTER 9. DISCRETE PROCESS MEASUREMENT
9.5 Pressure switches
A pressure switch is one detecting the presence of ﬂuid pressure. Pressure switches often use
diaphragms or bellows as the pressure-sensing element, the motion of which actuates one or more
switch contacts.
Recall from section 9.1 that the “normal” status of a switch is the resting condition of no
stimulation. A pressure switch will be in its “normal” status when it senses minimum press ure (e.g.
an applied pressure, or in some cases a vacuum condition) 5. For a pressure switch, “normal” status
is any ﬂuid pressure below the trip threshold of the switch.
Normally-open
(NO)
Normally-closed
(NC)
Pressure switch symbols
The following photograph shows two pressure switches sensing the same ﬂuid pressur e as an
electronic pressure transmitter (the device on the far left) because they are all plum bed to a common
tube:
5If the trip setting of a pressure switch is below atmospheric pressure, then it will be “actuated” at atmospheric
pressure and in its “normal” status only when the pressure fa lls below that trip point (i.e. a vacuum).9.5. PRESSURE SWITCHES 671
A legacy design of pressure switch uses a bourdon tube as the pressure-sensing element, a nd a
glass bulb partially ﬁlled with mercury as the electrical switching element. When a pplied pressure
causes the bourdon tube to ﬂex suﬃciently, the glass bulb tilts far enough to cause the mercury
to fall against a pair of electrodes, thus completing an electrical circuit. A great many pressure
switches of this design were sold under the brand name of “Mercoid,” with a few appear ing in this
photograph of a steam boiler (the round-shaped units with glass covers allowing inspection of the
bourdon tube and mercury tilt switch):
672 CHAPTER 9. DISCRETE PROCESS MEASUREMENT
A close-up photograph of one of these pressure switches appears here. The bourdon tube is grey
in color, and almost as wide in diameter as the circular switch housing. The mer cury tilt switch
bottles have yellow-colored plastic caps covering up their external electrical conta cts:
The next set of photographs show a mercury tilt switch removed from the pressure sw itch
mechanism, so you may see the switch in two diﬀerent states (contact open on the left, and closed
on the right):
Advantages of mercury tilt switches include immunity to switch contact degradation from harmful
atmospheres (oil mist, dirt, dust, corrosion) as well as safety in explosiv e atmospheres (since a spark9.5. PRESSURE SWITCHES 673
contained within a hermetically sealed glass bulb cannot touch oﬀ an explosion in the surrounding
atmosphere). Disadvantages include the possibility of intermittent electrica l contact resulting from
mechanical vibration, as well as sensitivity to mounting angle (i.e. you wo uld not want to use this
kind of switch aboard a moving vehicle!).
A pressure switch manufactured by the Danfoss corporation appears in the next photograph.
This particular model of pressure switch has windows on the front cover allowi ng a technician to see
the pressure limit setting inside:
This switch balances the force generated by a pressure-sensing element against a mechanica l
spring. Tension on the spring may be adjusted by a technician, which means the trip p oint of this
switch is adjustable.
One of the settings on this switch is the deadband or diﬀerential pressure setting, seen in the
lower window. This setting determines the amount of pressure change required to re-set t he switch
to its normal state after it has tripped. For example, a high-pressure switch w ith a trip point of 67
PSI (changes state at 67 PSI, increasing) that re-sets back to its normal state at a pressure of 63
PSI decreasing has a “deadband” or “diﬀerential” pressure setting of 4 PSI (67 PSI − 63 PSI = 4
PSI).674 CHAPTER 9. DISCRETE PROCESS MEASUREMENT
The “diﬀerential” pressure setting of a gauge pressure switch is not to be confus ed with a true
diﬀerential pressure switch. In the next photograph, we see a pressure switch truly actuated by
diﬀerential pressure (the diﬀerence in ﬂuid pressure sensed between two ports):
The electrical switch element is located underneath the blue cover, while the diaphragm pres sure
element is located within the grey metal housing. The net force exerted on the diaphragm by the
two ﬂuid pressures varies in magnitude and direction with the magnitude of those pres sures. If
the two ﬂuid pressures are precisely equal, the diaphragm experiences no net force (zero diﬀerent ial
pressure).
Like the Danfoss gauge pressure switch seen previously, this diﬀerential press ure switch has
a “trip” or “limit” setting as well as a “dead-band” or “diﬀerential” setting. I t is important to
recognize and clearly distinguish the two meanings of diﬀerential pressure in the context of this
device. It senses diﬀerences in pressure between two input ports (“diﬀerential pressure” – the
diﬀerence between two diﬀerent ﬂuid pressure connections), but being a switch, it also exhibit s some
dead band in its action (“diﬀerential pressure” – a change in pressure required to re-s et the switch’s
state).9.6. LEVEL SWITCHES 675
9.6 Level switches
A level switch is one detecting the level of liquid or solid (granules or powder) in a vessel. Lev el
switches often use ﬂoats as the level-sensing element, the motion of which actuates one or more
switch contacts.
Recall from section 9.1 that the “normal” status of a switch is the resting condition of no
stimulation. A level switch will be in its “normal” status when it senses minimum level (e. g. an
empty vessel). For a level switch, “normal” status is any ﬂuid level below the trip threshold of the
switch.
Normally-open
(NO)
Normally-closed
(NC)
Level switch symbols676 CHAPTER 9. DISCRETE PROCESS MEASUREMENT
9.6.1 Float-type level switches
Some level switches use a ﬂoat to sense the level of a liquid surface, actuating an electrical switch
by the motion of the ﬂoat. The electrical schematic symbol for a level switc h is actually based on
this type of mechanism, with a round “ball” ﬂoat drawn as the actuating element:
Normally-open
(NO)
Normally-closed
(NC)
Level switch symbols
An example of this technology is a level switch manufactured by Magnetrol, wi th two such
switches shown in the following photograph of a steam boiler. These switches sense water level in
the steam drum of the boiler:
9.6. LEVEL SWITCHES 677
The Magnetrol ﬂoat switch mechanism uses a mercury tilt bulb, tilted by a magnet’s attraction
to a steel rod lifted into position by a ﬂoat. The ﬂoat directly senses liquid level, positioning the
steel rod either closer to or farther away from the magnet. If the rod comes close enough to the
magnet, the mercury bottle tilts to change the switch’s electrical status:
Float
Connection to vessel
Connection to vessel
Float
Tilt switch
MagnetMagnetic
rod
Process
liquid
Process
liquid
A feature of this design is complete isolation between the electrical components a nd the “wet”
components sensing the liquid level. The steel rod moves inside a non-magnetic metal t ube, with
the tube sealing process ﬂuid pressure from escape while still allowing the magnet ic tilt switch to
sense ﬂoat position.
Simpler ﬂoat switch designs also exist for direct installation in open (vent ed) process vessels,
resembling the ﬂoat valve assembly on a water-ﬂush toilet. Any “limit” styl e switching element will
work here, including inductive proximity switches, to sense the ﬂoat’s position i n an environment
where no isolation need exist between the switch and the process ﬂuid(s):
Float
Switch Switch Float
Process liquid Process liquid678 CHAPTER 9. DISCRETE PROCESS MEASUREMENT
9.6.2 Tuning fork level switches
This level switch uses a metal tuning fork structure to detect the presence of a liquid or solid (powder
or granules) in a vessel:
An electronic circuit continuously excites the tuning fork, causing it to mechanically vibrate.
When the prongs of the fork contact anything with substantial mass, the resona nt frequency of
the fork decreases. The circuit detects this frequency change and indicates the presence of mass
contacting the fork. The forks’ vibrating motion tends to shake oﬀ any accumul ated material, such
that this style of level switch tends to be resistant to fouling.
It should be noted that the previous photograph of the tuning-fork style level swit ch is complete:
the fork “paddles” are only a couple of inches long and require no physical extensions in order to
properly detect liquid or solid material at that point.9.6. LEVEL SWITCHES 679
9.6.3 Paddle-wheel level switches
A more primitive variation on the theme of a “tuning fork” level switch i s the rotating paddle switch,
used to detect the level of powder or granular solid material. This level switch uses an electric motor
to slowly rotate a metal paddle inside the process vessel. If solid material rises to the level of the
paddle, the material’s bulk will place a mechanical load on the paddle. A torque-sensiti ve switch
mechanically linked to the motor actuates when enough torsional eﬀort is detected on t he part of the
motor. A great many level switches of this design sold in the United States under t he trade-name
Bindicator (so-called because they detected the level of solid material in storage bins).
A “Bindicator” style of level switch appears in this photograph (painted bla ck, against a white-
painted hopper), used to detect the presence of soda ash powder in a hopper at a water treatm ent
plant:
680 CHAPTER 9. DISCRETE PROCESS MEASUREMENT
9.6.4 Ultrasonic level switches
Yet another style of electronic level switch uses ultrasonic sound waves to detect the presence of
process material (either solid or liquid) at one point:
Sound waves pass back and forth within the gap of the probe, sent and received by piezoel ectric
transducers. The presence of any substance other than gas within that gap aﬀects the receiv ed audio
power, thus signaling to the electronic circuit within the bulkier portion of the device that process
level has reached the detection point. The lack of moving parts makes this probe q uite reliable,
although it may become “fooled” by heavy fouling.9.6. LEVEL SWITCHES 681
9.6.5 Capacitive level switches
Another electronic liquid level switch technology is capacitive: sensing level by changes in electrical
capacitance between the switch and the liquid. The following photograph shows a coupl e of capacitive
switches sensing the presence of water in a plastic storage vessel:
682 CHAPTER 9. DISCRETE PROCESS MEASUREMENT
9.6.6 Conductive level switches
Perhaps the simplest (and oldest) form of electrical level detection is where a pair of metal electrodes
contacts the process material to form a complete electrical circuit, actuating a rel ay. This type
of switch, of course, only works with granular solids and liquids that are electrically conductive
(e.g. potable or dirty water, acids, caustics, food liquids, coal, metal po wders) and not with non-
conducting materials (e.g. ultra-pure water, oils, ceramic powders).
A legacy design for conductive level switches is the model 1500 “induction relay” ori ginally
manufactured by B/W Controls, using a special transformer/relay to generat e an isolated AC probe
voltage and sense the presence of liquid:
Primary coil
To 120 VAC
power source
Secondary coil
Armature
Core
Probes
Conductive
liquid
B/W Controls
model 1500
inductive relay
N.O. switch contacts
Line voltage (120 V AC) energizes the primary coil, sending a magnetic ﬁeld through the laminated
ferrous6 core of the relay. This magnetic ﬁeld easily passes through the center of the secondary coil
when the secondary circuit is open (no liquid closing the probe circuit), thus completing the magnetic
“circuit” in the core. With the magnetic circuit thus completed, the armature will no t be attracted
to the core. However, when a circuit is completed by liquid level rising to contact bo th probes,
the secondary coil’s resulting current “bucks” the magnetic ﬂux 7 through its center, causing more
6“Ferrous” simply means any iron-containing substance.
7The reason for this opposition is rooted in the roles of prima ry and secondary coils as power load and source,
respectively. The voltage across each coil is a function of F araday’s Law of Electromagnetic Induction: V = N dφ
dt .
However, since the primary coil acts as a load (drawing power from the 120 V AC source) and the secondary coil acts
as a source (sending power to the probes), the directions of c urrent through the two coils will be opposite despite
their common voltage polarities. The secondary coil’s oppo site current direction causes an opposing magnetic force in
that section of the core, reducing the magnetic ﬂux there. In a normal power transformer, this reduction in magnetic9.6. LEVEL SWITCHES 683
magnetic ﬂux to bypass to the end poles where it attracts the ferrous armature to ward the core
frame. This physical attraction actuates switch contacts which then signal the presence of liquid
level at the probes.
The following pair of illustrations shows the two conditions of this level sw itch, with the magnetic
lines of ﬂux highlighted as dashed lines through the core:
(open) (closed)
Negligible magnetic flux
passes through armature
Opposition to magnetic flux
by secondary coil causes more
flux to attract armature
The “transformer” design of this particular conductive level switch not only prov ides electrical
isolation between the probes and the energizing (120 V AC) circuit, but it also enables a wide range
of detection voltages to be generated for the probes just by altering the number of wire “turns” in
the secondary coil. The B/W Controls model 1500 inductive relay is available i n a variety of AC
voltage output levels, ranging from 12 V AC (for detecting metallic substances) t o 800 V AC for use
with demineralized water such as that found in steam boiler systems.
More modern variations on the same design theme use much lower AC voltages 8 to energize
the probes, employing sensitive semiconductor ampliﬁer circuits to detect probe current and signal
liquid level.
ﬂux caused by secondary current is also felt by the primary co il (since there is only one magnetic “path” in a power
transformer’s core), which then causes the primary coil to d raw more current and re-establish the core ﬂux at its
original magnitude. With the inductive relay, however, the opposing magnetic force created by the secondary coil
simply forces more of the primary coil’s magnetic ﬂux to bypa ss to the alternate route: through the armature.
8The B/W Controls model 5200 solid-state relay, for example, u ses only 8 volts AC at the probe tips.684 CHAPTER 9. DISCRETE PROCESS MEASUREMENT
9.7 Temperature switches
A temperature switch is one detecting the temperature of some substance. Temperature switches
often use bimetallic strips as the temperature-sensing element, the motion of whi ch actuates one
or more switch contacts. An alternative design uses a metal bulb ﬁlled with a ﬂuid that expands
with temperature, causing the switch mechanism to actuate based on the pressure thi s ﬂuid exerts
against a diaphragm or bellows. This latter temperature switch design is r eally a pressure switch,
whose pressure is a direct function of process temperature by virtue of the physics o f the entrapped
ﬂuid inside the sensing bulb.
Recall from section 9.1 that the “normal” status of a switch is the resting condition of no
stimulation. A temperature switch will be in its “normal” status when it senses minimum
temperature (i.e. cold, in some cases a condition colder than ambient) 9. For a temperature switch,
“normal” status is any sensed temperature below the trip threshold of the switch.
Normally-open
(NO)
Normally-closed
(NC)
Temperature switch symbols
9If the trip setting of a temperature switch is below ambient t emperature, then it will be “actuated” at ambient
temperature and in its “normal” status only when the tempera ture falls below that trip point (i.e. colder than
ambient).9.7. TEMPERATURE SWITCHES 685
The following photograph shows a temperature-actuated switch manufactured by t he Ashcroft
corporation:
Like all other process switches, temperature switches exhibit a certain amount o f deadband in
their switching action. A temperature switch that trips at 300 oF rising, for example, will not re-set
at 300 oF falling. That switch would more likely reset at some lower temperature such as 29 5 oF.
With mechanical switch designs, some amount of deadband is inevitable due to frict ion inside the
mechanism. However, process switch deadband is actually a useful characteristic as it helps avoid
repeated “nuisance” alarms from happening.
To understand this concept, it is helpful to imagine a scenario where the process variable i s at
or very near the trip point. For our hypothetical temperature switch with a trip point of 300 oF
(rising), imagine a situation where the process temperature is precisely 300. 0 oF. Any further rise
in temperature will of course trip the switch (sounding an alarm). With no deadband, however,
the switch will immediately re-set when the temperature falls back down to 300 .0 oF. This means
the switch may possibly “cycle” back and forth between its trip and reset sta tes with just a minute
change in process temperature (300.0 oF to 300.1 oF and back again). If the temperature switch is
activating an alarm every time it trips, it will create a series of alarm events prompting operators to
repeatedly acknowledge the alarm. This is a nuisance to operations personnel, as it distracts them686 CHAPTER 9. DISCRETE PROCESS MEASUREMENT
from addressing what they already realize is a process problem. It is better for the s witch to trip
at 300.0 oF rising and remain in that tripped state until the temperature falls down to some degree
substantially below the trip point. This way, the operators only receive one alarm event rather than
multiple alarm events for each process temperature excursion.
Some mechanical temperature switches come equipped with a separate adjustment for deadband
(also called diﬀerential ). Setting this deadband adjustment in a mechanical temperature switch
requires the technician to repeatedly subject the sensing element to a rising and falling temperature,
to check that the switch trips at the proper setting and resets at the proper setti ng. This is analogous
to cycling the process variable back and forth when adjusting the “zero” and “span” set tings of an
analog transmitter: checking to see that the transmitter repeatedly outputs a 0% signal at the lower
range value (LR V) and a 100% signal at the upper range value (UR V).9.7. TEMPERATURE SWITCHES 687
For discrete temperature-sensing applications demanding high accuracy and repeatability,
electronic temperature switch circuits using thermocouples, RTDs, or thermistors may be used
instead of a mechanical (bi-metallic or ﬁlled bulb) sensing element. The operation and conﬁguration
of discrete electronic temperature switches is very similar to that of contin uous electronic
temperature transmitters.
An example of an electronic temperature switch module is the Moore Industries m odel SPA
(“Site Programmable Alarm”), shown here:
Not only is this particular model capable of directly interpreting both RTD and ther mocouple
signals, but it will also input 4-20 mA loop current signals as well. This means you may build a
temperature switch system out of a 4-20 mA loop-powered temperature transmi tter (located in the
ﬁeld) and an SPA switch module (located in a protected environment such as a contro l room or
electrical enclosure). Many other manufacturers and models of electronic switching unit s exist, with
the Moore Industries SPA being just one example.
With electronic temperature switches, the adjustment of deadband (diﬀerential) is both precise
and ﬂexible. Unlike mechanical switches where deadband is primarily a function of frict ion, and
therefore liable to change over time as the device wears, electronic switching cir cuits may be precisely
set for any trip and reset points along its measurement range, remaining very s table over time.688 CHAPTER 9. DISCRETE PROCESS MEASUREMENT
9.8 Flow switches
A ﬂow switch is one detecting the ﬂow of some ﬂuid through a pipe. Flow switches often use
“paddles” as the ﬂow-sensing element, the motion of which actuates one or more swit ch contacts.
Recall from section 9.1 that the “normal” status of a switch is the resting condition of no
stimulation. A ﬂow switch will be in its “normal” status when it senses minimum ﬂow (i.e. no ﬂuid
moving through the pipe). For a ﬂow switch, “normal” status is any ﬂuid ﬂow ra te below the trip
threshold of the switch.
Normally-open
(NO)
Normally-closed
(NC)
Flow switch symbols9.8. FLOW SWITCHES 689
A simple paddle placed in the midst of a ﬂuid stream generates a mechanical force which m ay
be used to actuate a switch mechanism, as shown in the following photograph:
Like all other process switches, ﬂow switches exhibit deadband (also called diﬀerential ) in their
switching action. A ﬂow switch that trips at 15 GPM rising, for example, will not re-set at 15 GPM
falling. That switch would more likely reset at some lower ﬂow rate such as 14 GP M. With the
“trip” and “reset” points being diﬀerent, the switch avoids unnecessary cycling if the process ﬂow
rate hovers near one critical value.690 CHAPTER 9. DISCRETE PROCESS MEASUREMENT
9.9 Review of fundamental principles
Shown here is a partial listing of principles applied in the subject matter of this cha pter, given for
the purpose of expanding the reader’s view of this chapter’s concepts and of their general int er-
relationships with concepts elsewhere in the book. Your abilities as a problem-solv er and as a
life-long learner will be greatly enhanced by mastering the applications of these princi ples to a wide
variety of topics, the more varied the better.
• “Normal” switch status : the “normal” status of a switch contact as deﬁned by the
manufacturer is its resting condition (minimum stimulus).
• Sourcing versus sinking : whether the electronic device in question is outputting
(conventional ﬂow) current or inputting current. Relevant to the proper connection of
electronic switches (especially proximity switches).
• Deadband and hysteresis : the diﬀerence in response with the independent variable
increasing versus decreasing. Usually caused by friction in a mechanism. Relevant t o the
“trip” settings of process switches: the value at which a switch changes stat e when its stimulus
increases is not the same value it changes state when its stimulus decreases.
References
“Installation and Service Manual – 1500 Induction Control Relays”, document 511 1500.M4R
02/05.Z145 10M, AMETEK Automation and Process Technologies, Clawso n, MI, 2005.
“Installation and Service Manual – 5200 Solid State Relays”, document 432 5 200.M4R 05/07.Z152,
AMETEK Automation and Process Technologies, Clawson, MI, 2007.